---
title: '2026 February and March Mindbender'
date: 2026-03-16
permalink: /posts/2026/03/mb
tags:
  - puzzle
  - potentials
---

Today, I discuss my solutions towards the Feburary and March mindbenders!
The puzzles can be found [here](https://momath.org/mindbenders/).

# Lattice Bacteria Puzzle

## Puzzle Statement

Consider an integer 2-D grid.
A bacterium begins at the origin.
Each bacteria may divide; that is, a bacterium at the point $$(x, y)$$ can be replaced by one at $$(x+1, y)$$ and $$(x, y+1)$$, supposing those two squares were previously bacteria-free.
Roughly, how many divisions must take place before the closed box with corners at $$(0,0), (0,3), (3,3)$$, and $$(3,0)$$ is clear of bacteria?

## An attempt via dynamic programming

First was via dynamic programming.
Let $$f(w, h)$$ be the amount of divisions for a bacteria to clear a $$w \times h$$ grid.
The problem asks to find $$f(4,4)$$.

If $$w = h = 1$$, then it takes only one division.
Otherwise, after one division, the top bacteria must clear a $$w \times (h-1)$$ grid, and the right bacteria must clear a $$(w-1) \times h$$ grid.
Thus, the recurrence I formulated is:

$$
f(w, h) =
\begin{cases}
  1 & w = h = 1 \\
  1 + f(w-1, h) + f(w, h-1) & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$

| h \ w | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| **1** | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 |
| **2** | 2 | 5 | 9 | 14 |
| **3** | 3 | 9 | 19 | 34 |
| **4** | 4 | 14 | 34 | 69 |

Note that the general solution is that

$$
f(w, h) = \binom{w+h}{w} - 1
$$

*This does not work.*
After a bacteria clears the grid, it does not magically disappear.
In other words, I cannot isolate the two bacteria separately.

## Simulations

Ok, at this point I gave up and wrote a simple [simulation](/files/posts/03-16-mb/simulation.py) to see how long it would take.
In a loop, I would:
- check if there are any bacteria in the $$w \times h$$ grid
- try to get that bacteria to divide
- if there was a bacteria in the way, then recurse to split that other bacteria

So I wrote this up and ran it.
Then waited.
Then waited.
Then waited...

At this point, I got suspicious.
Looking through the [states](/files/posts/03-16-mb/simulation.txt), it seemed that I entered an infinite recursive descent.

## The Solution

Finally, it got through in my head that it may not be possible to clear the grid.
How would I prove this?

I recalled a similar problem my friend showed me.
Similar, there was an integer grid of bacteria, but now there were infinite bacteria at every coordinate $$(x, y)$$ for $x \le 0$$.
They divide in a peculiar way, with two (orthogonally) adjacent bacteria mating to spawn a new bacteria.
That is, there are two ways they can divide:
- a bacteria at $$(x, y)$$ and $$(x+1, y)$$ being replaced with $$(x+2, y)$$
- a bacteria at $$(x, y)$$ and $$(x, y+1)$$ being replaced with $$(x, y+2)$$
The question is can a bacteria reach $$x=5$$?

A general approach towards solving such problems is to find invariants.
Suppose each configuration of bacteria has some *potential* that is maintained by these divisions.
I'll leave the solution to this related problem hidden, but as a hint, the golden ratio shows up!

Suppose we assign a value to each grid $$(x, y)$$, so that $$\phi(x,y) = 2^{-(x+y)}$$.
The potential is the sum of $$\phi$$ over occupied grid positions.
With this, upon a split,

$$
\phi(x,y) = \phi(x+1, y) + \phi(x,y+1)
$$

so that the potential is constant!
The starting potential is $$1$$.
What must be the potential be if the $$4 \times 4$$ grid was empty?
Well, there can be at most one bacteria on each grid square, so

$$
\begin{aligned}
  \phi & \le \sum_{x, y \ge 0} \phi(x, y) - \sum_{0 \le x, y \le 3} \phi(x, y) \\
       & = \sum_{x=0}^\infty 2^{-x} \sum_{y=0}^\infty 2^{-y} - \frac{225}{64} \\
       & = 2 \sum_{x=0}^\infty 2^{-x}  - \frac{225}{64} = 4 - \frac{225}{64} = \frac{31}{64} < 1
\end{aligned}
$$

So the potential must decrease!
However, divisions do not change the potential, so it is impossible to clear the grid.

Note that even clearing a $$3 \times 3$$ grid is impossible, as the remaining potential adds up to $$\frac{30}{32} < 1$$.

# Equal-Sum Subsets Puzzle

Your friend chooses 10 distinct integers from $$1$$ to $$100$$.
Is it always possible to find two disjoint, non-empty subsets of their 10 numbers that have the same sum?

## Pigeonhole and Solution

Unfortunately, I have seen this puzzle before as an application of the pigeonhole principle.

The first observation to make is that the disjointness only means that you need to choose two *distinct* subsets.
That is, given two overlapping but distinct subsets that add to the same sum, then removing the overlapping numbers would find a winning pair of disjoint subsets.

Given 10 numbers $$x_1, \ldots, x_10$$, there are $$2^{10} - 2 = 1022$$ possible subsets (ignoring trivial ones).
However, any subset must sum to at least $$1+2+\ldots+10 = 55$$, and at most $$100+99+\ldots+91 = 955$$, so there are $$901$$ possible sums.
As $$1022$$ subsets must have a range of $$901$$ values, two of them must have the same sum, by pigeonhole!

Pick those two subsets, remove the overlapping values, and thus you can always find two disjoint non-empty subsets of the same value!
